The DISCOVER Study 3-Year Results: Feasibility and Usefulness of Microscope-Integrated Intraoperative OCT during Ophthalmic Surgery.

To report the 3-year assessment of feasibility and usefulness of microscope-integrated intraoperative OCT (iOCT) during ophthalmic surgery. Prospective, consecutive case series. Adult participants undergoing incisional ophthalmic surgery with iOCT imaging who consented to be enrolled in the Determination of Feasibility of Intraoperative Spectral-Domain Microscope Combined/Integrated OCT Visualization during En Face Retinal and Ophthalmic Surgery (DISCOVER) study. The DISCOVER study is a single-site, multisurgeon, institutional review board-approved investigational device prospective study. Participants included patients undergoing anterior or posterior segment surgery who underwent iOCT imaging with 1 of 3 prototype microscope-integrated iOCT systems (i.e., Zeiss Rescan 700, Leica EnFocus, or Cole Eye iOCT systems). Clinical characteristics were documented, iOCT was directed by the operating surgeon at predetermined surgical time points, and each surgeon completed a questionnaire after surgery to evaluate the usefulness of iOCT during surgery. Feasibility of iOCT based ability to obtain an OCT image during surgery and usefulness of iOCT based on surgeon reporting during surgery. Eight hundred thirty-seven eyes (244 anterior segment cases and 593 posterior segment cases) were enrolled in the DISCOVER study. Intraoperative OCT demonstrated feasibility with successful image acquisition in 820 eyes (98.0%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 96.8%-98.8%). In 106 anterior segment cases (43.4%; 95% CI, 37.1%-49.9%), the surgeons indicated that the iOCT information impacted their surgical decision making and altered the procedure. In posterior segment procedures, surgeons reported that iOCT enabled altered surgical decision making during the procedure in 173 cases (29.2%; 95% CI, 25.5%-33.0%). The DISCOVER iOCT study demonstrated both generalized feasibility and usefulness based on the surgeon-reported impact on surgical decision making. This large-scale study confirmed similar findings from other studies on the potential value and impact of iOCT on ophthalmic surgery.