Optic disc imaging with spectral-domain optical coherence tomography: variability and agreement study with Heidelberg retinal tomograph.

To evaluate the agreement of optic disc measurements obtained with the Cirrus high-density optical coherence tomography (HD-OCT) and the Heidelberg retina tomograph (HRT) and compare the intervisit, test-retest variability between the instruments. Prospective, cross-sectional study. Two hundred seven subjects (109 glaucoma and 98 normal subjects). One eye from each individual was selected randomly for optic disc imaging by the Cirrus HD-OCT and the HRT. Areas of the optic disc and the cup, cup volume, vertical cup-to-disc ratio and cup-to-disc area ratio were compared between the instruments. The OCT measurements were corrected for ocular magnification using the Littman's formula. The measurement agreement was evaluated with the Bland-Altman plots. The intervisit test-retest variability was examined in 17 randomly selected glaucoma patients who underwent optic disc imaging weekly for 8 consecutive weeks. The intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) and the reproducibility coefficients of the optic disc parameters were computed. Measurement agreement, reproducibility coefficients, and ICCs of optic disc parameters. The OCT measured smaller optic disc and rim areas and greater cup volume, vertical cup-to-disc ratio and cup-to-disc area ratio than the HRT did (all with P < 0.001). There were proportional biases in the Bland-Altman plots between OCT and HRT optic disc measurements except for rim area and cup-to-disc area ratio. The 95% limits of agreement of rim area ranged between -0.28 and 0.88 mm(2) before, and between -0.22 and 0.92 mm(2) after correction for ocular magnification. Both OCT and HRT showed high test-retest reproducibility with ICCs ≥ 0.921. Although the reproducibility coefficient of OCT rim area (0.093 mm(2); 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.081-0.105 mm(2)) was significantly smaller than that of the HRT (0.186 mm(2); 95% CI, 0.163-0.210 mm(2); P = .018), there were no differences in the ICCs between the instruments. Optic disc assessment by spectral-domain OCT and confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscopy demonstrates poor agreement but similarly low test-retest variability. The source of their disagreement and its effects on the detection of progression require further study.