Baseline Factors Affecting Changes in Diabetic Retinopathy Severity Scale Score After Intravitreal Aflibercept or Laser for Diabetic Macular Edema: Post Hoc Analyses from VISTA and VIVID.

To evaluate whether select baseline systemic and ocular factors influence ≥2-step improvement in the Diabetic Retinopathy Severity Scale (DRSS) score at week 100 in VISTA and VIVID. Post hoc analysis of 2 similarly designed phase 3 trials, VISTA and VIVID. Total of 456 patients with center-involved diabetic macular edema (DME). VISTA and VIVID randomized 872 DME patients to receive intravitreal aflibercept injection (IAI) 2 mg every 4 weeks (2q4), IAI 2 mg every 8 weeks after 5 monthly doses (2q8), or macular laser photocoagulation. This post hoc analysis evaluated the influence of select baseline factors on ≥2-step DRSS score improvement by logistic regression in an integrated VISTA and VIVID dataset using observed cases (n = 456) with patients in each treatment group divided into tertiles based on each characteristic. Proportion of patients with ≥2-step improvement in DRSS score from baseline at week 100 by age, duration of diabetes, hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), body mass index (BMI), best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), central subfield thickness (CST), and DRSS score. At week 100, 10.1%, 34.3%, and 37.6% of patients in the laser, 2q4, and 2q8 groups experienced a ≥2-step DRSS score improvement, respectively. Age, duration of diabetes, HbA1c, BMI, BCVA, and CST had no impact on the ability to achieve ≥2-step improvement in DRSS score. Initial DRSS score was the only factor significantly associated with ≥2-step DRSS score improvement in all treatment groups at weeks 24, 52, 76, and 100. Relatively higher proportions of IAI-treated patients with worse BCVA or thicker CST experienced ≥2-step DRSS score improvement compared with those with better BCVA or thinner CST, respectively, but these associations were not statistically significant. A strong association was present between baseline DRSS score and ≥2-step DRSS score improvement at week 100 for DME patients in VISTA and VIVID.